---
title: "Gauge Theories and Zhang algebras"
collection: research
permalink: /teaching/gaugetheoriesandzhangalgebras
excerpt: "Abstract : We investigate lattice and continuous quantum gauge theories on the Euclidean plane with a structure group that is replaced by a Zhang algebra. Zhang algebras are non-commutative analogues of groups and contain the class of Voiculescu's dual groups. We are interested in non-commutative analogues of random gauge fields, which we describe through the random holonomy that they induce. We propose a general definition of a holonomy field with Zhang gauge symmetry, and construct a such fields starting from a quantum Lévy process on a Zhang algebra. As an application, we define higher dimensional generalizations of the so-called master field."
venue: "Paris 6 (Jussieu), Paris"
date: 2019-01-01
paperurl: "https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-02113282"
---

The present work deals with the question of defining gauge theories on non-commutative analogue of spaces of functions on a group.
In 1954 Yang and Mills exposed the theory at roots of the Standard Model, which is now known as Yang--Mills theory. This theory is the culminating point of a process started decades beforehand: physicists do not longer consider symmetries as a tool to reduce computations but rather as generators of a dynamic. An output of the Yang--Mills theory is a Lagrangian, that is a dynamic, a particle, the input being, essentially, a group of symmetries and a space on which particles evolves. The $\mathbb{U}(N)$--Yang--Mills theory as now a long story and has been studied both by physicians and mathematicians. Quantizing Yang--Mills theory on a four dimensional Lorentzian space is still an open question. In two dimensions, the problem of defining what quantum theory is, given a surface and a compact Lie group of symmetries, has been rigorously addressed by Lévy in [Lévy](https://arxiv.org/abs/math/0101239). The problem lies in defining what a translation invariant measure on the infinite dimensional space of connections on a fiber bundle with a compact Lie group as a structure group is. A connection is most accurately described through its holonomy along any closed loops drawn on the plane. Under the non-existing Yang--Mills measure on the space of all connections on a principal fiber bundle, the process that associates to a growing family of loops the holonomy of a random connection along these loops is Brownian. In this article, we focus on the case for which the underlying surface of the theory is the plan. The master field is the limit, in a vague sense, as $N$ tends to infinity of the $\mathbb{U}(N)$--Yang--Mills field. Studying fields that emerge the symmetry group grows is the subject of investigation of planar quantum field theory. The master field is most accurately understood and described with the help of free probability theory and is related to free Gaussian motions. Many generalizations of this field have been defined. For example, the authors in [cebron2017generalized](https://arxiv.org/abs/1601.00214) considered the limit of classical holonomy fields associated with (free) infinite divisible semi-group.
The present work includes these generalized master field into a larger class of fields having symmetries that show a Zhang algebra structure. As such, free generalized masters defined in [cebron2017generalized](https://arxiv.org/abs/1601.00214) are considered to be one dimensional. Our main concern is to give higher dimensional counterparts of the master field by enlarging the algebras of symmetries of that field as a starting point, which is slightly different of the point of view that predominates [cebron2017generalized](https://arxiv.org/abs/1601.00214).
